OP 1867_CROWN LAMDS_ENUGU CROWN LANDS_ ONDIST 12_1_1267
From the District Officer, Udi Division, Udi
To The Resident Officer, Onitsha Province, Onitsha
13th March, 1940

Enugu Crown Lands_RE

I have to refer to your recent visit on the 27th February to the Ngwo Council when the above subject was discussed.
2. The councilors argued that they had never signed or seen the agreement of 1915 and 1917. The two surviving Elders whose names are on the documents denied that they ever made their mark on or affixed their thumb impression to the documents.
3. It was agreed that i should obtain the thumb impression of these two elders, forward them to you and you would arrange to have them checked with the original documents in Lagos. You at the same time pointed out the result might be negative if the original thumb prints a re blurred or if it were considered that the substitutes had put forward in 1915 and 1917 to sign the agreements. The whole council agreed to have the test made and the Elders concerned were quite agreeable.
4. Accordingly, on 9th March, I took these two elders (Nnaji Nwagu and Ozo Eze Nwonu) in company with Samuel Onyia (A prominent Ngwo elder) to the Charge office at Enugu
5.The Finger print apparatus was duly prepared and at the critical moment of taking the impression, both chiefs flatly declined. They averred that they were frightened  that we might affix their thumb impression to the original agreements. I said that this was impossible as I would sign alongside the impression that they had been made before me at Enugu on the 9th March, 1940.
6. Samuel Onyia then produced a small penny ...... and I suggested that the impressions be put across of it, the paper and the blue lines across it would at once shew that it was not an official document and I should sign it as stated before.
7. But the two elders remained adamant and flatly refused, they said that unless the original document was produced in the Ngwo court, they would do nothing
8. I pointed out that their refusal tended to prove that they knew that they had signed the original documents and received the cash payments, but was afraid of it being proved. They stoutly denied this and still refused to have their thumb prints taken.
9. I told them that I would report the matter to you, I told them to return home, thanked the police inspector in charge of the finger print apparatus and left the charge office.

Leeming
District Officer,
Udi Division.