ENUGU NGWO TOWN
15th December 1941.

Through:
The D.O., Udi.
The Resident, Onitsha.
The Chief Commissioner, Enugu.
The Chief Secretary to the Government.
The Nigerian Secretary, Lagos.
To: His Excellency The Governor.

Sir,
We, the undersigned court members and elders of Ngwo, have the honor to forward you this petition on this all-important occasion for your considered opinion to refer you to the interviews our representatives made with the Chief Secretary on the 2nd of December 1938 (memo No. 29610/638/39), and which we received via memo 29610/833/39 dated the 3rd of March 1939, where you made it clear that the matter was receiving attention.

We wish to inform you that we have yet to hear any clear decision and remain more in doubt as no effort has been made towards settling our land grievances. We made another interview with the Nigerian Secretary in Lagos on the 27th of May 1941 stating our grievances orally to him, and no attention has since been made towards the case. We beg the Governor to give undivided attention to our land case.

The D.O. said that the Government paid some money as a result of 1915 and 1917 deeds, but we beg to say that we know nothing about such deeds or the payment of money.

The Forestry Department is making use of large areas of land known as Forestry Reserve, and the Government pays some money yearly for the land in question. How much does it pay for such land per year? Since the Forestry Department began its operations, we observe that such an amount must accumulate into a high sum, and it is now high time for us to know where it is kept.

 We want the Governor as a representative of the King to say something about Ngwo farmland. The discussion involves lands within the boundary line known to us which the Government acquired as "The Upper Water Works." The land includes areas such as Eke Obodo Umu Okpatu and the Ngwo Hill area. The Government has failed to give the Ngwo people at least 10% of compensation for the land acquisition as required by law. This has left the Ngwo community with no means of sustenance and has further increased the level of grievances felt among our people.

 We want to tell our Governor again that all our lands have been taken up for the use of the Water Works, leaving our farming lands diminished. Many elders are suffering hunger as a result of losing access to these lands. We demand the Government release part of the land back to us to enable farming or provide just compensation to mitigate the effects of this deprivation.

The Government should make haste and settle with us about the lands surrounding the Headworks of the Water Works. These lands have been withheld from us without any explanation, and their return or appropriate compensation is long overdue.

 The Government should warn the settlers who occupied a piece of our land at a place near the point we have "A Boundary." The occupiers must either quit away from the land or pay us a yearly rent as rightful owners. This situation needs urgent resolution to prevent further tensions and conflicts in the community.
Recognition of the economic impacts: As farming is our main source of sustenance, the acquisition and usage of our lands have made it increasingly difficult for us to produce food and maintain our livelihoods. We have no choice but to buy food, which adds unnecessary economic hardship.

Accountability for Forestry Department operations: The Forestry Department has utilized large portions of land in Ngwo, and payments have been made yearly to the Government for this land. However, the Ngwo people have not seen any part of this payment. We demand a transparent audit of these transactions and ask for the rightful share of the accumulated funds.

Request for immediate compensation: In all fairness, the Ngwo people deserve compensation for the lands acquired for Water Works, Forestry Reserves, and other projects. This includes the reallocation of resources, financial remuneration, or an alternative arrangement to restore livelihoods.

We must mention that we have not noticed if the Government cares about the land surrounding the Headworks of the Water Works. The Governor might be informed that we are not against the Water Works, but it is not fair to keep us in suspense.

Will the Governor kindly tell us the reason why if the Nike people take civil summons against our people in their courts the D.O permits its, and if we take summons against the Nike people in our court, the D.O does not permit it.

To summarize the whole thing-:
(a) We must inform the Governor that we know nothing about the  deeds of 1915 and 1917.
(b) The Governor must discuss the Forestry department Enugu, he should surrender some land to us for farming purpose
(c) We should like to know our position with the Government about the coalfield
(d) The Government should settle with us about the Enugu Township, the scout camp, Obwette and the land in the Uban area. 
(e) The Government should warn the settlers who live near a place we have boundary with the Akegbe to quit away.
(e) What about the land surrounding the Headworks of the Water Works?

Samuel Onyia
Chief Nnadi 	Nuragu
Chime Nwokwo
Ani Nwoji
Agu Nwangwu
Oji Nwagu
Ngwu Ozoagu
Ozo Ugwu Nwani
Onoh Nwochu
Ani Nwagu Nwogwu
Chime Nwifi
Ugwu Nwani Nwagwu
Ozo Ngwu-ozo Abo
Onyia Ude
Ozo Ugwu Nnadi
Ozo Ogbozo Abo
Ozo Ugwu Ukwani
Ogbodo Nwansi
Ozo Ngwu Aniaku
Ozo Ofo Ozoije
on behalf of others
(Signed by the Honorary Secretary, S. Onwe)

