Confidential
At Onitsha,
1st of April 1917,
Sir,
I have the honor to confirm the attached telegram sent to you in code from Udi and Enugu
2. On receipt f the plan from the Deputy General Manager of the railway, I arranged to visit Enugu as early as possible in regards to the land. When enroute there at Udi, Chief Onyeama  Eke, Paramount chiefs of the Abaja tribe who own the land concerned brought certain of Enugu chiefs to see me to complain that they had no place to farm as the government had, he said taken all their farm lands as the Government had, he said taken over all their farmlands by the Agreement  "A" forwarded to you under cover of my letter confi 3/1915 of the 20th, November, 1915.
3. It was clear that Chief Onyeama had received information that additional land was required and that his bringing the ciefs to me with his complaint was a move on his part with a view to obtaining large sums for compensation for any further land required.
4. I pointed out to chief Onyeama that it was hi duty as paramount chief to make it clear to the local chiefs that the benefits they received from the colliery and railway more than compensated them for any small loss of farmland which had occurred by the erection of buildings. I also informed him that i was aware that it was he who had advised the chiefs when the previous agreement was made that they should ask for £1000 a year rent and he did not deny this. His attitude at this time will be understood by his replying- "Some people like collieries, some people like farms, the chiefs prefer farms".
A case concerning Ex-chief Nechi of Oye who was imprisoned for arson and charged as an accessory to murder  was brought up for review because of an accusation that the witness was bribed to testify falsely. an investigation into that case would include Onyeama in the conspiracy charge and could lead to the suspension of his court warrant during his trial. Chief Onyeama appeared to be unreasonable perturbed and assured me of his honesty and loyalty to the government. He seemed anxious to render assistance to the government in every possible way.On proceeding to Enugu, Onyeama brought in the local chiefs, the additional area required by the railway and colliery was pointed out to them by Mr. Hayes, the Colliery Manager. The chiefs readily agreed to give the land to government and in consultation with Mr. Woodburn, Acting Manager of the Railway, I arranged to place on deposit the sum of fifty pounds for each of the four towns concerned to meet any compensation which might be required by them in view of possible building operations or mine shafts, railways...

The agreement was signed and as chief Onyeama appears to be a man of moods, I obtained from him an affidavit as to the willing consent of the chiefs which i do forward attached to this report, I think this will prevent the repetition of the complaint he brought to me at Udi

The area shown in the plan is large but as Mr. Woodburn pointed that very little of the ground will be affected in any way and it is necessary that the government should have power when extending the colliery operations to build or take in land where it is advisable to do so without the necessity of taking up land by fresh agreements in the future as new sites are decided upon.

The local chiefs are satisfied agreeable and the opposition threatened was solely on the part of Onyema who hoped to personally benefit considerably by the agreement but who became nervous as to the security of his position and withdrew his opposition as he was anxious to impress the government with the fact that he is and will be a loyal and useful chief. Whatever the outcome of the investigation being made by Mr. Duncan, I do not think that Onyeama will make any further attempt to government in any way at all for many years to come.

I enclose the agreement in duplicate, the sum of 200 pounds in full was paid for all compensation was placed on deposit in favor of the four towns concerned and will be withdrawn on as required by the respective chiefs.

(SD) R. Hargrove 
2nd Class Resident

