26_08_1940
CROWN LANDS_ENUGU CROWN LANDS

FILE NUMBER: OP 1867
VOLUMN 1
CLASS MARK: ONDIST 12/1/1267

Report n a Meeting with Council Udi Division by the Resident Onitsha Province on the issue of rent and other demands. 26th of August, 1940

The issue of rent for Crownland was raised but I warned the council that we stood by the authenticity of the 1915 and 1917 Deeds but that we would surrender some lands that are not in use back to the community and we are willing to give reasonable rent for areas not surrendered but no new demands.

Samuel Onya representing the council outlined their demands-
1. We will take the lands wich Government says that it surrenders. these lands are useful to us merely for grazing our cattle
2. Govt must surrender all the unbuilt upon land between the judges' house and the River Akwulu
3. Surrender all the unbuilt land from the Hospital Road including the Polo ground  to the chief commissioners home
4. surrender all similar land from hilltop House to waterworks
5. Surrender all land from water works to camp Iva
6. Surrender all similar land from the court location to police training school
9. Govt must pay royalties upon every coal produced by the colliery
10 the area assigned for water - be reduced
11. Rents be paid for the whole of the coalfield including the Eastern location

I told the council that I would not waste any time and that as far as i am concerned the matter was to an end. I would recommend no surrender of anything and no rents, The status quo should be preserved and then I left

May I say that the council insist the 1915-1917 deeds are forgeries based on the claim that
a- Government knows that it is in the wron, it wishes to right that wrong. The more we stand out for stiff terms, the more likely govt will give in eventually. It must recognize our just claim. Our land was taken on forged documents
b- Having regard to the fact that we have been cheated, we will go to law.

I suggest that in this event the council should be told to go to hell

Resident 
Onitsha Province
