16_12_1943
No. EN: 565/ 108
District Officer's Office,
 Udi Division, Enugu

The Resident Officer,
Onitsha Province

Enugu Waterworks

Referring to your letter NO OP 1867/307 of the 10th of December, the fence was erected at the beginning of this month and i arranged to visit Ngwo on the 3rd of December to see that there was no disturbance. On that day I was informed that on the 2nd there had been a meeting of the women of Ngwo who proposed to stage a demonstration but that the clan council had dissuaded them and had the matter in hand. I was also asked by the clan council to leave the matter to the council. I agreed.

2. I examined the fence on the 14th of December, 1943 and although there had been no disturbance or demonstration, I found that the people of Ngwo were still using the closed paths and that the bared wire crossed the paths had been cut (according to the report by colliery workers on their way to Iva Valley).

3. Next day a crowd of about 5ive to six hundred women appeared before me at the clan council meeting. I asked the council the meaning of the demonstration they said they did not know. I then informed the council that demonstrations by the women would have an effect on Governments resolution to exercise its rights over acquired land; that it was well known that the men could , if they wished control their wives( to this the council agreed) and that I had no intention of treating with the women. If they had a complaint, they must submit it through their council members but I pointed out that I had a lorry ready to go to Enugu for police at the first sign of any riotoness.

4. The clan council then held a meeting with the women and later reported to me that the women had come with peaceful intent to beg the district Officer to show them an alternative road to the water supply.

5. I went over the ground with the few clan council members and indicated where the engineer said they might have a path. When I had crossed to the other side of the valley and was far away from the women crowd, many of them presumably as a gesture, streamed down the forbidden path on the opposite site of the valley yelling and screeming.

6. I then held another meeting with the council which majority of the women attended peacefully enough...