30_08_1938
CROWN LANDS_ENUGU CROWN LANDS

FILE NUMBER: OP 1867
VOLUMN 1
CLASS MARK: ONDIST 12/1/1267

The claim of Udi chiefs that the awbia settlements was not part of the crown lands and thus they should pay rent to the communities led to an investigation on the boundary pillar No. UC 13 which was discovered a considerable distance below the awbia settlement down the Ayaba river towards the Enugu -awgu  motor road (Not far from Umu Ngelike). The boundary line of crown land runs north straight from her to NER II in Enugu on the river Obwetti. Its junction with the Asata river where the native location begins. Within the Awbia settlement there is a third pillar marked FD and unnumbered presumable this is connected with the Udi Forest Reserve.

The investigation proved beyond all further doubt that the whole of the awbia settlement is on crown land. It proved too that all the land between the settlement and Ngwo village and ITSELF WAS ON CROWN LAND. Thus disposing all of Ngwo claim regarding the settlement and of the Ngwo claim to a boundary in this direction. 
The effect of this is that the Akagbe Awbia are in occupation of ths settlement by permission of the government.
I informed all parties involved - The Ngwo council and the Akegbe Amadi who had obviously conspired together  in this matter in order to try to oust the awbia from the most fertile part of the land. They were disgruntled by the finding especially the Ngwos who tumbled to the conclusion that the whole of their villages was on crownland. The irony of the situation was that they were hoist on their own petard for and had they not persisted in this claims, the present investigation and the unpleasant truths arising.


Tour Notes in the Udi Division Tuesday August 30th, 1938
It was explained that crown land was available for farming and the local authority was prepared to grant a farming permit to the natives of any of these towns from which government obtained Crown Land in and around Enugu should  obtain annual permits signed annual permits free of charge. Unless they are in possession of such permits signed by the Local Authority they must be regarded as trespassers. On the other hand anyone not belonging to those  towns was a stranger and must pay for a permit. It was emphasized that these permits were personal and must be renewed each year- it was a grave offence to hand the permit over over to anyone else.
Another issues I emphasized is that the conversion of native land to crown land abolished all pre-existing boundaries. Any part available within the whole area could be applied for farming purposes by Ngwo, Nike, Nsude and others irrespective of old boundaries which existed prior to the acquisition ... Old boundaries die hard-- major issues


There is something to be said for the younger generation who are geniunly aggrieved, they of all the grantor towns have given up more than any other - as the whole of their town was included within crown land- I doubt if the people themselves had known it, they would have agreed to this, Lump sum compensation was paid (a poor substitute for rent) to certain chiefs in the old days of warrant chiefs and under the presidency of Onyeama. Though those chiefs, who are alive stoutly deny any part in the transaction, I have no doubt that they received the money but now cannot admit it to the present generation for if they did, they would probably be lynched

13, I am not satisfied in my mind about Ngwo, it seems to me that two things should be done- if the village of Ngwo is not and never will be required, it might be excluded from the  crown land, If it is required, let a general permit be issued free each year to the council giving them permission to reside and farm within the village confines.

14, Lump sum acquisition when the payment is made to a handful of individuals is a fertile source of trouble. It would be preferable to throw it to the community at large but as has been previously observed, it is a poor substitute in an illiterate country for rent. I hope it is possible to pour some oil of this kind on this troubled waters

After explaining to the Awka trespassers without permit from the local authority to the Nike people that they could not demand any rent in respect to land which do not belong to them and to Ngwo that they were making a fuss about nothing as the land belonged neither to them or to Nike, we returned to duck.

Signed Senior Resident Onitsha Province at Ngwo
30th August, 1938

PS. The Ngwo people came to see me in a body on the 31st and their attitude bore out all that i have written. I hope too that facility will be given to them as regards employment in the colliery- they have, I know a very fair quota there already but their villages has the advantage of being the nearest of all to the mines.



