29_08_1938
CROWN LANDS_ENUGU CROWN LANDS

FILE NUMBER: OP 1867
VOLUMN 1
CLASS MARK: ONDIST 12/1/1267

The Honorable secretary, Southern Province Enugu
Proposed Aerodrome at Emene 29th of August, 1938

Refering to the proposed site with the district officer, Udi (Captain C.E Hudson) on the 22nd of August. We met the councillors from the village composing of Nike group and went on a tour round the pillared boundary D.2711 TO D. 2728
 The meeting after the tour was characterized by a rift between the village of Emene and other villages in Nike group because Emene claimed full and independent right to lease the land in question  to to receive all the rent for it. The other villages enlisted that the land was communal to the group. There is no doubt that the land is Emene farming land but it is situated just outside of the village

The attitude of Emene towards the transaction is more favorable than that of the other villages. They were prepared to give the land to government but would not refuse rent if the government agreed to pay one. The other group endeavored to dictate conditions prior to discussing the question but concluded eventually by asking for a total of 250 pounds a year

A second meeting on the 27th of August at Idodo Nike was attended by the councilors of the neighboring Idodo group. At this meeting at Nike native court where we heard of a court suite No. 15/1934- Iji Nike versus Emene Nike- the claim was by Iji Nike for rents received by Emene from strangers occupying land near the aerodrome site but on the opposite side of the road close to the old emene railway station. The review order was made by Mr. Beaumont and upheld by Mr. Lloyd to the following effect.-
The strangers now concerned are squatters moved off the railway because they were blocking view of the level crossing. These people had moved to a land between Iji and Emene and I consider it definitely part of Emene Ani and not Isi agu or Ani agu farmland. Accordingly in this case, I rule rents in question to be paid to Emene but i add that this judgement does not prejudice Iji's claim to share rent paid by strangers living or farming on the Ani Agu or Isiagu farmed in common between Emene and Iji. 
To illustrate this, I would say land beyond the railway on the Iji side cannot be regarded strictly as coming inside Emene town.

Strangers farming such land with permission of Emene or Iji will have to pay their rents through the court to be shared by the two parties concerned... signed Beaumont S.P.L 28 of January 1935.

There is no doubt that the Aerodrome site is looked after by Emene but it is Anu Agu (Land in the Field0 outside the village itself.

After a prolonged and somewhat heated meeting and the arbitration of six Idodo councilors, the whole of Nike including Emene welcomed the Aerodrome scheme and made the following room-

A from today, all rents and other monies which shall be due from strangers to natives of the Nike group in respect of occupation or utilization or utilization of Nike land for any purpose (s) other than ordinary farming only shall be divided into equal parts as follows-
i-The village nearest to the occupied land in each case shall take one half of the rents or other monies
ii -the other Nike Villages, the names of which are specified below shall take the other half of the paid rents or other monies which shall be divided amongst them in equal shares.
Each of the Nike Villages specified  shall keep a register to record in full all the rents due to its rule and shall each year pay these rents in full into the group treasury on deposit. In December of each calendar year, the group treasurer  shall pay out all such rents and monies deposited in accordance with the principle of division laid down below.

The Nike village group include-
IJI
IBEAGWA
AMAOKPU
EMENE
AMORJI
ALULU
AKPOGA
NEHETENCHE
OBUNAGU
OBUNAGU
ONUOGBA
UGWUOMU
EKO (EKOR)
NKUBO (NKWUBOR)
UGWUOGO
AGBO-OGAZI
OGUI
NIKE UNOR
OGBEKE
EZIAMA
NNOKPA
AMAOWENE
EDEM

This was Arbitrated by the councilors of the Idodo group at Obodo Nike the 27th day of August 1938 as witnessed by-
Okenwa 				X
UKENWAGBU 			X
NNAJI NWANAMANI		X
NNAJI NWEDE			X
JOSEPH MBA			X
AYALU CHIEDE		X

In view of this I strongly recommend that a rent of five shillings an acre be paid by government for the 146 acres which the area comprises. If Government is prepared to be generous, it will go far towards regaining the confidence of these people which has been shaken in the past. It is important that Nike labor be employed as much as possible in connection with the project.

Senior Resident Onitsha Province

